CYBERSECURITY FUNDAMENTALS

	CYBERSECURITY INRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
	CYBERSECURITY CONCEPTS
	SECURITY ARCHITECTURE PRINCIPLES
	SECURITY OF NETWORKS, SYSTEMS, APPLICATIONS AND DATA
	INCIDENT RESPONSE
	SECURITY IMPLICAATIONS AND ADOPTIONS OF EVEOLVING TECHNOLOGY
	
	
OBJECTIVES 
	• Understand basic cybersecurity concepts and definitions
	• Understand basic risk management and risk assessment principles relating to cybersecurity threats
	• Apply security architecture principles
	• Identify components of a security architecture
	• Define network security architecture concepts
	• Understand malware analysis concepts and methodology
	• Recognize the methodologies and techniques for detecting host- and network-based intrusions via intrusion
	detection technologies
	• Identify vulnerability assessment tools, including open source tools and their capabilities
	• Understand system hardening
	• Understand penetration testing principles, tools and techniques
	• Define network systems management principles, models, methods and tools
	• Understand remote access technology and systems administration concepts
	• Distinguish system and application security threats and vulnerabilities
	• Recognize system life cycle management principles, including software security and usability
	• Define types of incidents (categories, responses and time lines for responses)
	• Outline disaster recovery and business continuity planning
	• Understand incident response and handling methodologies
	• Understand security event correlation tools, and how different file types can be used for atypical behavior
	• Recognize investigative implications of hardware, operating systems and network technologies
	• Be aware of the basic concepts, practices, tools, tactics, techniques and procedures for processing digital forensic data
	• Identify network traffic analysis methods
	• Recognize new and emerging information technology and information
		

==============================================================================================================================================


CYBERSECURITY INRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

	DEFINITION
	OBJECTIVES
	KEY BUSINESS AND TECHNOLOGY FACTORS
	CYBERSECURITY ROLES AND GOVERNANCE
	DOMAINS OF CYBERSECURITY
	
	
	INTRODUCTION TO CYBERSECURITY
		Computer security. Network security. Information security. Cybersecurity. All of these 
		terms are used to describe the protection of information assets. the objective of 
		information security is threefold, involving the critical components of confidentiality, 
		integrity and availability.
		
		All three components are concerned with the protection of information. Confidentiality 
		means protection from unauthorized access, while integrity means protection from 
		unauthorized modification, and availability means protection from disruptions in access.
		
		In current era of security, there are references to both “cybersecurity” and 
		“information security.” The terms are often used interchangeably, but in reality 
		cybersecurity is a part of information security.
		
		Generally, cybersecurity refers to anything intended to protect enterprises and individuals
		from intentional attacks, breaches, incidents and consequences. More specifically, 
		cybersecurity can be defined as 
		
		“the protection of information assets by addressing threats to information processed, 
		stored and transported by internetworked information systems.”
		
		
		CYBERSECURITY AND SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
			In order to successfully protect their systems and information, cybersecurity 
			professionals must demonstrate a high degree of situational awareness. This 
			type of awareness takes time to cultivate, because it usually develops through
			experience within a specific organization.
			
			Central to this awareness is an understanding of key business and technology 
			factors that affect information security. Numerous factors, both internal and 
			external, can directly impact an organization and its security needs, including:
				• Business plans and business environment
				• Available information technology, security process or systems in particular
				
			With respect to technology, there are many factors that can impact security, such as:
				• Platforms and tools used
				• Network connectivity (internal, third-party, public)
				• Level of IT complexity
				• Operational support for security
				• User community and capabilities
				• New or emerging security tools
				
			When evaluating business plans and the general business environment, consider drivers, such as:
				• Nature of business
				• Risk tolerance
				• Security profile
				• Industry trends for security
				• Mergers, acquisitions and partnerships
					– Consider type, frequency and resulting level of integration
				• Outsourcing services or providers
		
	
	
	DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INFORMATION SECURITY AND CYBERSECURITY 
	
		The terms “cybersecurity” and “information security” are often used interchangeably. 
		Some use the term cybersecurity as a synonym for information security, IT security 
		and information risk management.
		
		Information security deals with information, regardless of its format—it encompasses 
		paper documents, digital and intellectual property in people’s minds, and verbal or 
		visual communications.
		
		Cybersecurity, on the other hand, is concerned with protecting digital assets—everything 
		from networks to hardware and information that is processed, stored or transported by 
		internetworked information systems. Additionally, concepts such as nation-state-sponsored 
		attacks and advanced persistent threats (APTs) belong almost exclusively to cybersecurity. 
		It is helpful to think of cybersecurity as a component of information security.
		
		the term cybersecurity will be defined in this guide as protecting information assets by 
		addressing threats to information processed, stored and transported by internetworked 
		information systems.
		
		PROTECTING DIGITAL ASSETS
			In their cybersecurity frameworks, both the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
			and the European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) have identified 
			five key functions necessary for the protection of digital assets. These functions coincide with 
			incident management methodologies and include the following activities:
			
			• Identify: Use organizational understanding to minimize risk to systems, assets, data and capabilities.
			• Protect: Design safeguards to limit the impact of potential events on critical services and infrastructure.
			• Detect: Implement activities to identify the occurrence of a cybersecurity event.
			• Respond: Take appropriate action after learning of a security event.
			• Recover: Plan for resilience and the timely repair of compromised capabilities and services.
			
			
	CYBERSECURITY OBJECTIVES
	
		CONFIDENTIALITY, INTEGRITY AND AVAILABILITY 
		
			Confidentiality is the protection of information from unauthorized access or disclosure. Different 
			types of information require different levels of confidentiality, and the need for confidentiality 
			can change over time.
			Personal, financial and medical information require a higher degree of confidentiality than the 
			minutes of a staff meeting, for example. Similarly, some companies need to protect information on 
			competitive future products before their release but may need to make the same information public 
			afterwards.
			
			Data must be protected from improper disclosure according to its sensitivity and applicable legal 
			requirements. The confidentiality of digital information can be maintained using several different 
			means, including access controls, file permissions and encryption.
			
			
			
			Integrity is the protection of information from unauthorized modification. For example, if a bank 
			transfers US $10,000 to another financial institution, it is important that the amount does not 
			change to US $100,000 during the exchange. 
			
			The concept of integrity also applies to software and configurations.Any violation of integrity is 
			significant because it may be the first step in a successful attack against system availability or 
			confidentiality. Contaminated systems and corrupted data must be dealt with immediately to assess 
			the potential for further violation or damage. The integrity of digital assets can be controlled 
			by logging, digital signatures, hashes, encryption and access controls.
			
			
			
			Availability ensures the timely and reliable access to and use of information and systems. This 
			would include safeguards to make sure data are not accidentally or maliciously deleted. 
			This is particularly important with a mission-critical system, because any interruptions in its 
			availability can result in a loss of productivity and revenue.
			
			Similarly, the loss of data can impact management’s ability to make effective decisions and 
			responses. Availability can be protected by the use of redundancy, backups and access control.
		
		[PIC : CIA_RelatedImpact.PNG]
		
		NONREPUDIATION
			Confidentiality, integrity and availability are equally important factors in the process of ensuring 
			nonrepudiation. In a digital context, nonrepudiation refers to the concept that a message or other 
			piece of information is genuine.
			It assures that the data’s integrity has been protected and that the party sending or receiving it 
			cannot deny or repudiate that they sent or received it. Nonrepudiation is important in transactions 
			that require trust, such as financial transactions and legal matters. Nonrepudiation is implemented 
			through transactional logs and digital signatures.
			
			
			
	CYBERSECURITY ROLES
		
		GOVERNANCE, RISK MANAGEMENT AND COMPLIANCE
		
			Governance is the responsibility of the board of directors and senior management of the organization. 
			A governanceprogram has several goals:
				• Provide strategic direction
				• Ensure that objectives are achieved
				• Ascertain whether risk is being managed appropriately
				• Verify that the organization’s resources are being used responsibly
				
			
			Risk management is the process by which an organization manages risk to acceptable levels. 
			Risk management requires the development and implementation of internal controls to manage and mitigate 
			risk throughout the organization, including financial and investment risk, physical risk and cyberrisk.
			
			
			Compliance is the act of adhering to, and the ability to demonstrate adherence to, mandated requirements 
			defined by laws and regulations. It also includes voluntary requirements resulting from contractual 
			obligations and internal policies.
			
		[PIC : CS_Roles.PNG]
		
		
	CYBERSECURITY DOMAINS
	
		CYBERSECURITY CONCEPTS
			This domain provides discussion of critical concepts such as:
				• Basic risk management
				• Common attack vectors and threat agents
				• Patterns and types of attacks
				• Types of security policies and procedures
				• Cybersecurity control processes
			All of these concepts are addressed in light of how they influence security policies and procedures 
			relating to cybersecurity threats. Each topic considers various approaches with a focus on security 
			best practices.
			
		
		SECURITY ARCHITECTURE PRINCIPLES
			This domain provides information that helps security professionals identify and apply the principles 
			of security architecture. It discusses a variety of topics, including:
				• Common security architectures and frameworks
				• System topology and perimeter concepts
				• Firewalls and encryption
				• Isolation and segmentation
				• Methods for monitoring, detection and logging
		
		
		SECURITY OF NETWORKS, SYSTEMS, APPLICATIONS AND DATA
			This domain addresses basic system hardening techniques and security measures, including:
				• Process controls
					– Risk assessments
					– Vulnerability management
					– Penetration testing
				• Best practices for securing networks, systems, applications and data
					– System and application security threats and vulnerabilities
					– Effective controls for managing vulnerabilities
					
		
		INCIDENT RESPONSE
			This domain articulates the critical distinction between an event and an incident. More importantly, 
			it outlines the steps necessary when responding to a cybersecurity incident. In doing so, it covers 
			the following topics:
				• Incident categories
				• Disaster recovery and business continuity plans
				• Steps of incident response
				• Forensics and preservation of evidence
				
		
		SECURITY IMPLICAATIONS AND ADOPOTIONS OF EVEOLVING TECHNOLOGY
			This domain outlines the current threat landscape, including a discussion of vulnerabilities associated 
			with the following emerging technologies:
				• Mobile devices
				• Cloud computing and storage
				• Digital collaboration
	
	
		SECURITY AND RISK MANAGEMENT
		ASSET SECURITY
		SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND ENGINEERING
		COMMUNICATION AND NETWORK SECURITY
		IDENTITY AND ACCESS MANAGEMENT
		SECURITY ASSESSMENT AND TESTING
		SECURITY OPERATIONS 
		SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT SECURITY
		
		
==============================================================================================================================================

CYBERSECURITY CONCEPTS

	RISK MANAGEMENT TERMS, CONCEPTS AND FRAMEWORKS
	COMMON ATTACK TYPE, THREAT VECTORS, PATTERNS AND TYPES OF ATTACK
	GENERAL PROCESS AND ATTRIBUTES OF CYBTERATTACK
	POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FRAMEWORK AND GUIDELINES
	CYBERSECURITY CONTROL PROCESS
	
		
		RISK 
			The Combination of probability of an event and its consequences. Risk is mitigated through
			the use of controls or safeguards.
			
			RESIDUAL RISK : Even after safeguards are in place, there will always be residual risk, defined
			as the remaining risk after management has implemented a risk response.
			
			INHERENT RISK : The risk level or exposure without taking into account the actions that management
			has taken or might take.
			
			APPROACHES TO RISK
				There are a number methodologies available to measure risk
					Risk tolerance
					Size and Scope of the environment in question
					Amount of data available
					
			[PIC : RISKMANAGEMENT_FRAMEWORK.PNG]
			
		THREAT
			Anything that is capable of acting against an asset in a manner that can result in harm.
			
		ASSET
			Something of either tangible or intangible value that is worth protecting, including people,
			information, infrastructure, finances and reputation.
			
		VULNERABILITY 
			A Weakness in the design, implementation, operation or internal control of a proces that could
			expose the system to adverse threats from threat events.
				
			
			
			
		COMMON ATTACK TYPE AND VECTORS
			As attack vectors and methodologies continue to evolve, they represent a significant threat on 
			the client side. Although some attacks are made at random with no particular traget in mind, 
			there are also trageted attacks against recipients who have been reseaerched and identified as 
			useful by attackers.
			
			[PIC : CyberThreatAgents.PNG]
			
			THEAT AGENTS
				CORPORATIONS : Corporations have been known to breach security boundaries and perform 
				malicious acts to gain a competitive advantage.
				
				NATION STATES : Nation states often target government and private entities with a high
				level of sophistication to obtain intelligence or carry out other destructive activities.
				
				HACKTIVISTS : Although they often act independently, politically motivated hackers may
				target specific individuals or organizations to achieve various ideological ends.
				
				CYBERTERRORISTS : Characterized by their willingness to use voilence to achieve their goals,
				cyberterrorists frequently target critical infrastructures and government groups.
				
				CYBERCRIMINALS : Moticated by the desire for profit, these individuals are involved in 
				fraudulent financial transactions.
				
				CYBERWARRIORS : Often likended to hackivists, cyberwarrior, also reffered to as cyberfighters,
				and natinally motivied citizens who may act on behalf of a political party or agains another
				political party that threatens them.
				
				SCRIPT KIDDIES :  Script kiddies are young individuals who are learning to hack; they may work
				alone or with others and are parimarily involved in code injection and distributed denial-of-service
				(DDoS) attacks.
				
				ONLINE SOCIAL HACKERS : Skilled in social engineering, these attackers are frequently involved in
				cyberbullying, indentify theft and collection of other confidential information or credentials.
				
				EMPLOYEES : Although they typically have fairly low-tech methods and tools, dissatisfied current or 
				former employees represent a clear cybersecurity risk. All of those attacks are adversarial,
				
				
				
			ATTACK ATTRIBUTES
				While risk is measured by potential activity, an ATTACK is the actual occurence of a threat. More
				specifically, an attack is an activity by a threat agent against an asset. From an attaker's point
				of view, the asset is a TARGET, and the path or route used to gain access to traget(asset) is 
				know as an ATTACK VECTOR			.	
					
					INGRESS ATTACK VECTOR -- Intruction into systems, some attackes are designed to remove data from 
					systems and networks.
						
					EGRESS ATTACK VECTOR -- also known as Data Exfiltration
						
				The attacker must defeat any controls in place and/or use an EXPLOIT to take advan of a vulnerability
				Another attribute of an attack is the ATTACK MECHANISM, or the method used to deliver the exploit.
				Unless the attacker is personally performing the attack, the attack mechanism may invlove a PAYLOD, or
				container, that delivers teh exploit to the traget.
					
				[PIC : AttackAttributes.PNG]	
					
		
		
		GENERALIZED ATTACK PROCESS
			While each attack is different, most adversarial theat events follow a common process.
			
			[PIC :  ThreatProcess.PNG]
			
			
			PERFORM RESCONNAISSANCE : The adversary gathers information using variety of techniques,
			which may include:
				• Sniffing or Scanning the network perimeter
				• Using Open source discovery of organizational information
				• Running malware to identify potential tragets
				
			CREATE ATTACJ TOOLS : The adversary crafts the tools needed to carry out a future attack,
			which may inlude:
				• Phishing or Spear phishing attacks
				• Crafting couterfeit website or certificates
				• Create and operating false front organization to inject malicious components into the
				supply chain
				
			DELIVER MALICIOUS CAPABILITIES : The adversary inserts or installs whatever is needed to carry
			out the attach, which may include the following tactics:
				• Introducting malware into organizational information systems
				• Placing sobverted invdividuals into previleged positions whith the organization
				• Installing sniffers or scanning devices on targeted networks and systems
				• Inserting tampered hardware or critical components into organizational systems or supply chain
			
			EXPLOIT AND COMPROMISE : The adversary take advantage of information and systems in order to compromise
			them, which may involve the following actions:
				• Split tunneling or gaining physical acccess to organizational facilities
				• Exfiltration data or sensitive information
				• Exploiting multitenancy in a could environment
				• Launching Zero-Day exploits
				
			CONDUCT AN ATTACK : The adversary coordinates attack tools or performs activities that inferfer with
			organizational functions. Potential methos of attack include:
				• Communication interception or wireless jamming attacks
				• Denial-of-service (DoS) or distributed denial-of-service (DDoD) attacks
				• Remote interference with or physical attacks on organizational facilities or infrastructure
				• Session-hijacking or man-in-the-middle attacks
				
			ACHIEVE RESULTS : The adversary causes an adverse impact, which may include:
				• Obtaining, unauthorized access to systems and/or sensitive information
				• Degrading organizational services or capabilities
				• Creating, corrupting or deleting critical data
				
			MAINTAIN A PRESENCE OR SET OF CAPABILITIES : The adversary continues to exploit and compromise the system
			using the following techniques:
				• Obfuscating adversary action or interfering with intrusion detection systems (IDSs)
				• Adapting cyberattacks in response to organizational security measures
				
			COORDINATE A CAMPAIGN : The adversary coordinates a compaign against the organization that may involve the 
			following measure:
				• Multi-staged attacks
				• Internal and external attacks
				• Widespread and adaptive attacks
				
				
				
		NONADVERSARIAL THREAT EVENTS
			Although most attackers are result of coordinated effort, there are other events than can pose
			various risk to an organization. Some of the most common Nonadversarial threat events are:
			
			• Mishandling of criticl or sensitive information by authorized users
			• Incorrect privilege settings
			• Fire, flood, hurricane, windstorm or earthquake at primary or backup facilities
			• Introduction of vulnerabilities into software products
			• Pervasive disk errors or other problems caused by aging equipment
			
			
			
		MALWARE AND ATTACK TYPES 
			MALWARE, also called malicious code, is software designed to gain access to targeted computer 
			systems, steal infromation or disrupt computer operations. There are serveral type of malware,
			the most important being computer VIRUSES, network WORMS and TROJAN HORSES, which are differentiated
			by the way in which they operate or spread.
			
			VIRUSES : A computer virus is piece of code that can replicate itself and spread from one computer
			to another. It requires intervention or execution to replicate and/or cause damage.
			
			NETWORK WORMS : A variant of Computer Viruses, which is essentially a piece of self-replicating
			code designed to spread itself across computer networks. It does not require intervention or execution
			to replicate.
			
			TROJAN HORSES : Which is a piece of malware that gain access to targeted system by hiding within a genuine
			application. Trojan Horses are often broken down into categories reflecting their purposes.
			
			BOTNETS : A botet (a tern derived from "robot network") is a large, automated and distributed network of 
			previously compromised computers that can be simyltaneously controlled to launch large-scale attacks
			such as DoS, DDoS.
			
		A number of futher terms are also used to describe more specific types of malware, characterized by
		their purposes. They include:
		
			SPYWARE : A class of malware that gathers information about a person or organization without
			the knowledge of that person or organization.
			
			ADWARE : Designed to present advertisements (generally unwanted) to users.
			
			RANSOMWARE : A class of extortive malware that locks or encrypts data or functions and 
			demands a payment to unlock them.
			
			KEYLOGGER : A class of malware that secretly records user keystorkes and, in some cases, screen content
			
			ROOTKIT : A class of malware that hides the existence of other malware by modifying the underlying OS.
			
		
		OTHER ATTACK TYPES
			In addition to malware, there are many other types of attacks, the MITRE Corporation publishes a 
			catalouge of common attack patterns known as CAPEC - Common Attack Pattern Enumeration and 
			Classification.
			
			APT - ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREATS : Complex and coordinated attacks directed at a specific entiry or
			organization. They require an enormus amount of research and time, often taking onths or even years
			to fully execute.
			
			BACKDOOR : A means of regaining access to a compromised system by installing software or configurating
			existing software to enable remote acess under attacker-defined conditions.
			
			BRUTE FORCE ATTACK : An Attack made by trying all possible combinations of passwords or encryption
			keys until the correct one is found.
			
			BUFFER OVERFLOW : Occurs when a program or process tries to store more data in a buffer than it was
			intended to hold.
			
			CROSS-SITE SCRIPTING (XSS) : A type of injection in which malicious scripts are injected into otherwise
			begign and trusted websites. XSS attacks occur when an attacket uses a web application to send malicious
			code, generally in the form of a broswer side scripts, to a different end user.
			
			DENIAL-OF-SERVICE (DoS) ATTACK : An assault on a service from single sourec that floods it with so many
			requests that it becomes overwhelmed and is either stopped completely or operates at a significantly
			reduce rate.
			
			MAN-IN-THE-MIDDLE ATTACK : An attack strategy in which the attacker intercepts the communication steam
			between two parts of the victim system and then replaces the traffic between the two components with 
			the intruder's own, eventually assuming control of the commucation.
			
			SOCAIL ENGINEERING : Any attempt to exploit socal vulnerabilities to gain access to information and/or
			sytems. It involves a "con game" that tricks other into divulging information or opening malicious software
			or program.
			
			PHISHING : A type of electronic mail (email) attack that attempts to convince a user that the originator is 
			genuine, but with the intention of obtaining information for use in social engineering.
			
			SPEAR PHISHING : An Attack where social engineering techniques are used to masuerade as a trusted party to 
			obtain important information such as passwords from the victim
			
			SPOOFING : Faking the sending address of a transmission in order to gain illegal entry into secure sytem.
			
			SQL INJECTION : Crafted User-Controlled input consisting of SQL syntax is user without proper validation 
			as part of SQL queries.
			
			ZERO-DAY EXPLOIT : A Vulnerability that is exploited before the software creator/vendor is even aware 
			of its existence.
			
			
			
	
		POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FRAMEWORK AND GUIDELINES
		
			Information security policies are primary element of cybersecurity and governace. They specify requirements
			and define the roles and responsibilies of everyone in the organization, along with expected behaviors in 
			various situations. 
			Therefore, they must be properly created, accepted and validated by the board and executive management before
			being communicated throughout the organization.
			
			POLICY LIFE CYCLE
				Policy framework, another important aspect of information security policies is their lifecycle of 
					DEVELOPMENT
					MAINTAINANCE
					APPROVAL and
					EXCEPTION
				Every compliance document should have a formal process of being created, reviewed, updated and approved.
				Additionally, there may be legitimate need for an exception to a policy; therefore, a clear process of 
				how an exception is approved and monitored in necessary.
				
			GUIDELINES
				There are serveral attributes of good policies that should be considered:
					• Security policies should be an articulation of a well-defined infromation security strategy
					that capture the intent, expectations and direction of management.
					• Policies must be clear and easily understood by all affected parties
					• Policies should be short and concise, written in plain language.
					
			COMPLIANCE DOCUMENTS AND POLICY FRAMEWORKS
			
			COMPLIANCE DOCUMENTS
				Compliance documents, such as policies, standards and procedures, outline the actions that are 
				are requires or prohibited. Violations may be subject to disciplinary actions.
			
			POLICY FRAMEWORKS
				The way that compliance documents relate to and support each other is call a policy framework.
				A framework defines different types of document and what is contained in each. Organizations may
				may have smiple or relatively comple policy frameworks depending on their unique needs.
				
				[PIC : ComplianceDocTypes.PNG]
				
				Some organizations may not implement all of these types of docuemtns. For example, smaller 
				organizations may simply have policies and procedures; other may have policies, standards 
				and procedures, but not guidelines 
				
			TYPES Of INFORMATION SECURITY POLICIES 
				The number and type of policies an organization chooses to implement varies based on the organization's
				size, culture, risk, regulatory requirements and complexity of operations.
				
			GENERAL INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY 
				COBIT 5 - Control Objectives for Information and Related Technologies
				[PIC : InformationSecurityPolicySet.PNG]
					
					ACCESS CONTROL POLICY
						The access control policy provides proper access to internal and external stakeholders to 
						accomplish business gosl. this can be measured by metrics such as the:
							Number of access violations that exceeds the amount allowed
							Amount of work distruption due to insufficient access rigths 
							Number of segregation of duties incidents or audit findings 
							
						The Access Control Policy should cover the following topics among others:
							Physical and logical access provisioning life cycle
							Least privilege/need to know
							Segragation of duties
							Emergency access
							
					PERSONAL INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY
						
					SECURITY INCIDENT RESPONSE POLICY
						This policy addresses the need to respons to incidents in a timely manner in order to recovery
						business activites.
					
		CYBERSECURITY CONTROLS
			Cybersecurity is a dynamic and ever-changing environment and therefore requires continuous monitoring,
			Updating, testing, patching and changing as technology and business evolve. These controls are critical
			to maintaining security within any organization's IT infrastructure.
			
			IDENTITY MANAGEMENT
				Key objective of IM is to centralize and standardize this process so that it becomes a consistent
				and common service across the organization.
				IM is comprised of many components that provide a collective and common infrastructure, including
				directory services, authenticaation services (validating who the user is) and authorization 
				services (ensuring the user has appropriate privileges to access systems based on personalized
				profile). It also includes user-management capabilities, such as user provisioning and deprovisioning.
				
			PROVISIONING AND DEPROVISIONING
				User provisioning is part of the organization's hiring process where user account are created.
				Passwords and access control rights are generally assigned based on the job duties of the user.
				This can be complicated process, as users may need access to many different resources such as systems,
				databases, email, applications and remote services, each of which has its own access control rights,
				passwords, encryption keys or other authorization and authenticaation requirements.
				
			AUTHORIZATION
				The authorization process used for access control requires that the system be able to identify and
				differentiate amond user. Access rules (authorization) specify who can access what. For example,
				access control is often based on least privilege, which means granting user only those accesses 
				required to perform their duties. Access should be on a docuemnted need-to-know and need-to-do
				basis by type.
				
			ACCESS CONTROL LISTS
				To provide security authorizations for the files and facilities listed previously, logical access
				control mechanisms untilize access authorization tables, also reffered to as access control list (ACL)
				or acccess control tables. ACL refer to a register of users (including groups, machines and process)
				who have permission to use a particular system resources
				
			ACCESS LISTS
				Access lists filter traffic at router interfaces based on specified criteria, thus afforing back
				network security. Without access list, router pass all packets.
				
			PRIVILEGED USER MANAGEMENT
				Privileged access permits authorized users to maintain and protect system and networks. Privileged
				users can often access any infromation stored within a system, which means they can modify or circumvent
				existing safeguards such as access control and logging.
				
			CHANGE MANAGEMENT
				Change management is essential to the IT infrastructure. Its purpose is to ensure that changes to processes,
				systems, software, applications, platforms and configuration are introduces in an orderly, controlled
				manner.
				
			CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT
				Maintaining the security configurations or network devices, system, applications and other IT resources
				is critically important to ensure security controls are properly installed and maintained.
				
			PATCH MANAGEMENT
				Patches are solutions to software programming errors. In many cases, security vulnerabilities are introduced
				by coding errors. Therefore, it is vital that software bugs that identified as security vulnerabilities be
				patched as soon as possible.
				Failure to apply patches to know security vulnerabilities is most common cause of security breaches. Patching
				is there an important part of vulnerability management, and organization must setup proess to identify patches
				that are relevant to their IT infrastructure.
				Once a necessary patch is identified, it should be tested to ensure it doest not negatively impact operations.
				After the patch has been verified, it can be scheduled and installed where appropriate.
			
				
				
==============================================================================================================================================

SECURITY ARTHICTECTURE PRINCIPLES

	PERIMETER SECURITY CONCEPTS
	SECURITY ARTHICTECTURE AND FRAMEWORKS
	THE OSI MODEL AND TCP/IP COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL
	DEFENCE IN DEPTH
	FIREWALL CONCEPTS AND IMPLEMENTATION
	ISOLATION AND SEGMENTATION
	INTRUSION DETECTION AND PREVENTION SYSTEMS
	ANTIVIRUS AND ANTI-MALWARE
	ENCRYPTION FUNDAMENTALS, TECHNIQUES AND APPLICATIONS
	
		OVERVIEW OF SECURITY ARCHITECTURE
			Security architecture describe the structure, components, connection and layout of security control
			with in organization's IT infrastructure. Organizations have different types of security architectures
			that determine the particulars of various subsystems, products and applications. 
			
			Security architecture shows how defense in depth is implemented, as well as how layers of control 
			are linked. It is therefore essential to designing and implementing security controls in any complex 
			environment.
			
			Each component of a given system poses its own security risk. Because the topology of security 
			architecture varies from one organization to another, there are a number of different variables and risk 
			to consider when addressing the topology of a particular organization.
			
			THE VIRTUAL ORGANIZATION
				Outsourcing, both onshore and offshore, is increasingly common as companies focus on core competencies
				and ways to cut costs. From an information security point of view, these arrangements can present risk 
				that may be difficult to quantify and potentially difficult to mitigate. 
				Typically, both the resources and skills of the outsourced functions are lost to the organization, which
				itself will present a set of risk Providers may operate on different standards and can be difficult to 
				control. The security strategy should consider outsourced security services carefully to ensure either 
				that they are not a critical single point of failure or that there is a viable backup plan in the event 
				of service provider failure.
				
			THE SECURITY PERIMETER
				Many current security controls and architectures were developed with the concept of a 
				perimeter—a well-defined (if mostly virtual) boundary between the organization and the outside world. 
				In these models of cybersecurity, the focus is network- or system-centric. In the system-centric model, 
				the emphasis is on placing controls at the network and system levels to protect the information stored 
				within. An alternative model is data-centric, which emphasizes the protection of data regardless of its 
				location.
				
				An important component of the security perimeter is the Internet perimeter. This perimeter ensures secure 
				access to the Internet for enterprise employees and guest users residing at all locations, including those 
				involved in telecommuting or remote work. In order to provide security of email, front-end mobile and web apps, 
				domain name system (DNS), etc., the Internet perimeter should:
				
					• Route traffic between the enterprise and the Internet
					• Prevent executable files from being transferred through email attachments or HTTP responses
					• Monitor network ports for rogue activity
					• Detect and block traffic from infected internal end points
					• Control user traffic bound toward the Internet
					• Identify and block anomalous trafﬁc and malicious packets recognized as potential attacks
					• Eliminate threats such as email spam, viruses and worms
					• Enforce ﬁltering policies to block access to web sites containing malware or questionable content
					
				The perimeter should also provide protection for virtual private networks (VPNs), wide area networks (WANs) 
				and wireless local area networks (WLANs)
					
					• Terminate VPN traﬁ'ic from remote users
					• Provide a hub for terminating VPN trafﬁc from remote sites
					• Terminate traditional dial—in users
				
				VPN traffic is ﬁrst filtered at the egress point to the speciﬁc IP addresses and protocols that are part 
				of the VPN service. A remote user can only gain access alter being authenticated.
				
			
		
		SECURITY ARCHITECTURES AND FRAMEWORKS
			A great number of architectural approaches currently exist, and many of them have evolved from the development 
			of enterprise architecture. Although their specific details may differ, they all generally aim to articulate 
			what processes a business performs and how those processes are executed and secured. They articulate the 
			rganization, roles, entities and relationships that exist or should exist to perform a set of business processes.
			
			Similarly, models of security architecture typically fall into two categories: 
				PROCESS MODELS
					Process Models allow a great deal of ﬂexibility in how each element of the architecture is developed. 
					The essence of a framework is to describe the elements of architecture and how they relate to one another
				
				FRAMEWAORK MODELS
					Process model is more directive in its approach to the processes used for the various elements.

			
			
			SABSA AND THE ZACHMAN FRAMEWORK
				Zachman framework approach of developing a who, what, why, where, when and how matrix is shared by 
				Sherwood Applied Business Security Architecture (SABSA). 
				
				[PIC : SABSA.PNG]
				
			THE OPEN GROUP ARCHITECTURE FRAMEWORK (TOGAF)
				Another architecture framework is The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF). Developed by 
				The Open Group in the 1990s, this high-level and holistic approach addresses security as an 
				essential component of the overall enterprise design. TOGAF’s objective is to ensure that 
				architectural development projects meet business objectives, that they are systematic and 
				that their results are repeatable. 
				
				[PIC : TOFAG.PNG]

				
				
		THE OSI MODEL
			The Open Systems Interconnect (OSI) model is used to describe networking protocols. Because it is rarely 
			implemented in actual networks, it is considered a reference to standardize the development of actual networks.

			OSI was the first nonproprietary open definition for networking.

			The OSI model defines groups of ﬁmctionality required for network computers into layers, with each layer 
			implementing a standard protocol for its functionality. 
			
			[PIC : OSIMODEL.PNG]
			
			
			
			TCP/IP
				The protocol suite used as the de facto standard for the Internet is known as the 
				Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP). The TCP/IP suite includes 
				both network-oriented protocols and application support protocols. 
				[PIC : TCPIP.PNG]
				
			ENCAPSULATION
				Encapsulation is the process of adding addressing information to data as it is transmitted down the 
				OSI stack. Each layer relies on the services provided by the layer below. Each layer of the OSI model 
				only communicates with its destination peer. It does so using datagrams or Protocol Data Units (PDUs). 
				
				Upper layer data are passed down to the transport layer as segments and are “wrapped” with a header 
				for identiﬁcation.

				These segments are passed down to the network layer as packets again with a header. Data are broken 
				down to frames at the data link layer and also have control information appended. At the physical 
				layer, data take the form of bits (ls and Os) for delivery to destination network.

				Once at the destination—each layer on the receiving end strips off the appropriate addressing information
				and passes it up the OSI stack until the message is delivered. This process is called decapsulation.
				
				[PIC : OSIModel_ISO.PNG]
				
		
		
		DEFENSE IN DEPTH
		
			Because no single control or countermeasure can eliminate risk, it is often important to use several controls 
			to protect an asset. This process of layering defenses is known as defense in depth, but it may also be called 
			protection in depth and security in depth. It forces an adversary to defeat or avoid more than one control to 
			gain access to an asset.

			Defense in depth is an important concept in designing an effective information security strategy or architecture. 
			When designed and implemented correctly, multiple control layers provide multiple opportunities for monitoring to
			detect the attack. Adding additional controls to overcome also creates a delay so that the attack may be interrupted
			and prevented.
			
			The number and types of layers needed is a function of asset value, criticality, the reliability of each control 
			and the degree of exposure. Excessive reliance on a single control is likely to create a false sense of confidence. 
			For example, a company that depends solely on a firewall can still be subject to numerous attack methodologies. 
			
			A further defense may be to use education and awareness to create a “human firewall,” which can constitute a critical 
			layer of defense. Segmenting the network can constitute yet another defensive layer.

			Using a defense in depth strategy for implementing controls has several advantages, including increasing the effort 
			required for a successful attack and creating additional opportunities to detect or delay an attacker. There are 
			several ways defense in depth can be implemented.
			
			[PIC : DefenseInDepth.PNG]
			
			Another way to think about defense in depth is from an architectural perspective of:
			
				HORIZONTAL DEFENSE IN DEPTH, where controls are placed in various places in the path of 
				access for an asset, which is functionally equivalent to concentric ring model above.
				
				VERTICAL DEFENSE IN DEPTH, where controls are placed at different system layers—hardware, 
				operating system, application, database or user levels.
				
			Using defense in depth techniques does require effective planning and understanding of each type’s strengths and weaknesses 
			as well as how the controls interact. It is easy to create an overly complex system of controls, and too many layers can be 
			as bad as too few. When developing defense in depth implementations, consider the following questions
				• What vulnerabilities are addressed by each layer or control?
				• How does the layer mitigate the vulnerability?
				• How does each control interact with or depend on the other controls?
				
				
				
		FIREWALLS 
			A FIREWALL is defined as a system or combination of systems that enforces a boundary between two or more networks, 
			typically forming a barrier between a secure and an open environment such as the Internet. It applies rules to control
			the type of networking traffic ﬂowing in and out. Most commercial firewalls are built to handle commonly used Internet 
			protocols.
			
			Effective firewalls should allow individuals on the corporate network to access the Internet and simultaneously prevent 
			others on the Internet from gaining access to the corporate network to cause damage. Most organizations follow a deny-all 
			philosophy, which means that access to a given resource will be denied unless a user can provide a specific business 
			reason or need for access to the information resource. The converse of this access philosophy— which is not widely 
			accepted—is the accept—all philosophy, under which everyone is allowed access unless someone can provide areas for denying 
			access.
			
			
			FIREWALL GENERAL FEATURES
				Along with other types of security, firewalls control the most vulnerable point between a corporate network and the 
				Internet, and they can be as simple or complex as the corporate information security policy demands.
				
				There are many diﬁ'erent types of firewalls, but most of them enable organizations to:
				
					• Block access to particular sites on the Internet.
					• Limit traffic on an organization’s public services segment to relevant addresses and ports.
					• Prevent certain users from accessing certain servers or services.
					• Monitor and record communications between an internal and an external network.
					• Monitor and record communications between an internal network and the outside world to 
					investigate network penetrations or detect internal subversion.
					• Encrypt packets that are sent between different physical locations within an organization 
					by creating a VPN over the Internet (e.g., IP security [lPSec], VPN turmels). The capabilities 
					of some firewalls can be extended so they can also provide for protection against viruses and 
					attacks directed to exploit known operating system vulnerabilities.
					
			NETWORK FIREWALL TYPES
				Generally, the types of network firewalls available today fall into three categories:
				
					PACKET FILTERING FIREWALLS
						First generation firewalls were packet filtering—based firewalls deployed between the private 
						network and the Internet. In packet filtering, a screening router examines the header of every 
						packet of data traveling between the Internet and the corporate network. Packet headers contain 
						information, including the IP address of the sender and receiver, along with the port numbers 
						(application or service) authorized to use the information transmitted. Based on that information, 
						the router knows what kind of Internet service (e.g., web-based service or FTP) is being used to 
						send the data as well as the identities of the sender and receiver of the data. Then, the router 
						can prevent certain packets from being sent between the Internet and the corporate network. 
						
						For example, the router could block any trafﬁc to and from suspicious destinations. 
						
						[PIC : PacketFilterFirewall.PNG]
						
						Because their filtering rules are performed at the network layer, packet filtering ﬁrewalls are 
						generally stable and simple. This simplicity has both advantages and disadvantages
					
						[PIC : PacketFilterFirewallPC.PNG]
						
						In light of these advantages and disadvantages, packet filtering is most effective when implemented 
						with basic security and monitoring in mind.
					
						Some of the more common attacks against packet filter firewalls are:
						
							IP SPOOFING —In this type of attack, the attacker fakes the IP address of either an internal 
							network host or a trusted network host. This enables the packet being sent to pass the rule 
							base of the firewall and penetrate the system perimeter. 
							If the spooﬁng uses an internal IP address, the firewall can be conﬁgured to drop the packet 
							on the basis of packet ﬂow direction analysis. However, attackers with access to a secure or 
							trusted external IP address can spoof on that address, leaving the ﬁrewall architecture 
							defenseless.
						
							SOURCE ROUTING SPECIFICATION —This type of attack centers around the routing that an IP packet 
							must take when it traverses the Internet from the source host to the destination host. In this 
							process, it is possible to deﬁne the route so it bypasses the ﬁrewall. However, the attacker 
							must know the IP address, subnet mask and default gateway settings to accomplish this. A clear 
							defense against this attack is to examine each packet and drop packets whose source routing 
							specification is enabled. Note that this countermeasure will not be effective if the topology 
							permits a route that skips the choke point.
						
							MINIATURE FRAGMENT ATTACK —Using this method, an attacker fragments the IP packet into smaller 
							ones and pushes it through the firewall. This is done with the hope that only the ﬁrst sequence 
							of fragmented packets will be examined, allowing the others to pass without review. This is 
							possible only if the default setting is to pass residual packets. Miniature fragment attacks 
							can be countered by conﬁguring the firewall to drop all packets where IP fragmentation is enabled

					
					APPLICATION FIREWALL SYSTEMS
						Packet filtering routers allow the direct ﬂow of packets between internal and external systems. 
						The primary risk of allowing packet exchange between internal and external systems is that the 
						host applications residing on the protected network’s systems must be secure against any threat 
						posed by the allowed packets.

						In contrast to packet ﬁltering routers, application— and circuit-level gateways allow information 
						to ﬂow between systems but do not allow the direct exchange of packets. Therefore, application 
						firewall systems provide greater protection capabilities than packet ﬁltering routers.
						
						The two types of application ﬁrewall systems sit atop hardened (i.e., tightly secured) operating 
						systems such as Windows NT and UNIX. They work at the application level of the OSI model.

						There are two types of application firewall systems:

							APPLICATION-LEVEL GATEWAYS —Application—level gateways are systems that analyze packets through 
							a set of proxies—one for each service (e.g., Hypertext Transmission Protocol [HTTP] proxy for 
							web trafﬁc, FTP proxy). The implementation of multiple proxies, however, impacts network 
							performance. When network performance is a  concern, a circuit-level gateway may be a better 
							choice.

							CIRCIIT-LEVEL GATEWAYS —Commercially, circuit—level gateways are quite rare. Because they use 
							one proxy server for all services, they are more efﬁcient and also operate at the application 
							level. There, TCP and UDP sessions are validated, typically through a single, general-purpose 
							proxy before opening a connection. This differs from application—level gateways, which require 
							a special proxy for each application—level service.

						Both application firewall systems employ the concept of bastion hosting in that they handle all 
						incoming requests from the Internet to the corporate network, such as FTP or web requests. 
						Bastion hosts are heavily fortified against attack. When there is only one host handling incoming 
						requests, it is easier to maintain security and track attacks. In the event of a break—in, only 
						the ﬁrewall system is compromised, not the entire network.
						
						[PIC : ApplicationFirewall.PNG]
						
					
					STATEFUL INSPECTION FIREWALLS
						A stateful inspection firewall, also referred to as dynamic packet filtering, tracks the destination 
						IP address of each packet that leaves the organization’s internal network. Whenever a response to a 
						packet is received, its record isreferenced to ascertain whether the incoming message was made in 
						response to a request that the organization sent out. This is done by mapping the source IP address 
						of an incoming packet with the list of destination IP addresses that is maintained and updated. 
						This approach prevents any attack initiated and originated by an outsider.
						
						[PIC : StatefullInspection.PNG]
						
						In contrast to application firewalls, stateful inspection firewalls provide control over the ﬂow of 
						IP traffic. They do this by matching information contained in the headers of connecﬁon—oriented or 
						eonnecﬁonless IP packets at  the transport layer against a set of rules authorized by the organization.
						Consequently, they have advantages and disadvantages.

							STATELESS VS. STATEFUL
								Stateless ﬁltering does not keep the state of ongoing TCP connection sessions. In other words, 
								it has no memory of what source port numbers the sessions’ client selected. Stateful ﬁrewalls 
								keep track of TCP connections. The firewall keeps an entry in a cache for each open TCP 
								connection. Stateless ﬁrewalls perform more quickly than stateful firewalls, but they are 
								not as sophisticated.
					
					
					EXAMPLES OF FIREWALL IMPLEMENTATIONS
						Firewall implementations can take advantage of the functionality available in a variety of firewall 
						designs to provide a robust layered approach in protecting an organization’s information assets. 
						
						Commonly used implementations available today include:
						
							SCREENED-HOST FIRWALL-UTILIZING a packet ﬁltering router and a bastion host, this approach 
							implements basic network layer security (packet filtering) and application server security 
							(proxy services). An intruder in this conﬁguration must penetrate two separate systems before
							the security of the private network can be compromised.							
							This firewall system is conﬁgured with the bastion host connected to the private network with
							a packet ﬁltering router between the Intemet and the bastion host. Router filteﬁng rules allow
							inbound traffic to access only the bastion host, which blocks access to internal systems.							
							Since the inside hosts reside on the same network as the bastion host, the security policy of 
							the organization determines whether inside systems are permitted direct access to the Internet, 
							or whether they are required to use the proxy services on the bastion host.
							
							
							DHUAL-HOMES FIREWALL —This is a ﬁrewall system that has two or more network interfaces, each 
							of which is connected to a different network. A dual-homed ﬁrewall usually acts to block or 
							filter some or all of the traffic trying to pass between the networks. 
							A dual-homed firewall system is a more restrictive form of a screened—host firewall system in
							which a dual-homed bastion host is conﬁgured with one interface established for information 
							servers and another for private network host computers.
							
							
							DEMILITARIZED ZONE(DMZ) or SCREEBED-SUBNET FIREWALL —This is a small, isolated network for an 
							organization’s public servers, bastion host information servers and modem pools. 
							The DMZ connects the untrusted network to the trusted network, but it exists in its own 
							independent space to limit access and availability of resources. As a result,external systems 
							can access only the bastion host and possibly information servers in the DMZ. 
							The inside router manages access to the private network, accepting only traffic originating from 
							the bastion host. The filtering rules on the outside router require the use ofproxy services by 
							accepting only outbound trafﬁc on the bastion host. 
							The key benefits of this system are that an intruder must penetrate three separate devices, 
							private network addresses are not disclosed to the Internet, and internal systems do not have 
							direct access to the Internet.
							
					
					FIREWALL ISSUES
						Problems faced by organizations that have implemented firewalls include the following:
						
							Configuration errors—Misconﬁgured ﬁrewalls may allow unknown and dangerous services to pass 
							through freely.
							
							Monitoring demands—It is necessary to apply and review log settings appropriately, but 
							monitoring activities may not always occur on a regular basis.
							
							Policy maintenance—Firewall policies may not be maintained regularly
							
							Vulnerability to application— and input-based attacks—Most firewalls operate at the network 
							layer; therefore, they do not stop any application—based or input—based attacks, such as 
							SQL injection and buffer—overﬂow attacks. Newer-generation firewalls are able to inspect 
							trafﬁc at the application layer and stop some of these attacks.
							
							
					
					
					NEXT GENERATION FIREWALLS
						Next Generation Firewalls (N GFWs) are the newest type of firewall to enter the marketplace 
						aimed at addressing two key limitations of earlier variants: 
						
							1) the inability to inspect packet payload and 
							2) the inability to distinguish between types of web traffic.

						An NGFW is an adaptive network security system capable of detecting and blocking 
						sophisticated attacks.

						NGFWs typically perform traditional functions such as packet ﬁltering, stateful inspection and 
						network address translation (NAT), but introduce application awareness, incorporate deep packet 
						inspection (DPI) technology and offer varying degrees of integrated threat protection, such as 
						data loss prevention (DLP), intrusion prevention system (IPS), SSL/SSH inspection and web ﬁltering.
						
						APPLICATION AWARENESS is “the capacity of a system to maintain information about connected applications
						to optimize their operation and that of any subsystems that they run or control.” This is important 
						because discriminating between legitimate and malicious trafﬁc has become increasingly difficult amid 
						the upsurge in web-based services. The ability of an NGFW to differentiate between types of web traffic
						such as an authorized business web application and a streaming media site aids enforcement of corporate 
						policies—regardless of port or protocol—and similarly offers insight to user activities and behavior.
						
						DPI allows for payload interrogation against signatures for known exploits, malware, etc. DPI affords 
						a great deal of information about your trafﬁc, which aids in determination of normal uafﬁc making 
						anomaly detection more effective, especially in more complex networks.

						Depending on your particular organization, you may be asked to review, recommend or specify vendor 
						solutions.
						









						
					



						
						





				

			




		